# Critical Making Portfolio
## Reflections on Rules and Meanings

In a collection titled *Your Computer is on Fire*, Noah Wardrip-Fruin tells us that "You Can't Make Games About Much". Wardrip-Fruin's operational logics framework outlines the fundamental ways that games produce meaning, and the "vast gulf between what can be said in this vocabulary and what games promise to be about" (232). Games have underlying rules that are surfaced to the player with representations that might take verbal, visual, aural, or other forms. What the computer understands as an overlap between two programmed boxes becomes a collision between go-karts when players interpret how the rules and representations combine. Each of the following pieces is created using a different tool and presents a unique perspective on the ways that rules and play generate meaning, and how rules interpretation and enforcement intersect with colonialism and law. The following projects communicate scholarly meanings in a way similar to games. Can our vocabulary of game logics support games about interpretation itself? 

The first piece is a cross-stitch self-portrait, created as a nonogram puzzle. I used this [nonogram generator](https://iamtoolbox.com/nonogram-generator/) to turn a silhouette of my face into a nonogram puzzle, and then solved the puzzle using cross-stitch embroidery. Before this, I had only ever solved nonograms on my phone or my 3DS. The lack of digital oversight introduced new possibilities. At the end of the puzzle, I discovered that there were multiple solutions that abided by the puzzle's rules. I intentionally chose a solution that did not match the original image, demonstrating how procedural ambiguity can produce unexpected meanings. A face distorted by a mismatch between puzzle constraints and visual representation. 

My game *what's all this about?* directly asks the player to interpret each of the game's events. Adam Le Doux's game engine [bitsy](https://www.bitsy.org/), is ideal for exploring how representations of space and collision logics convey ideas. Kate Compton's [Tracery](https://tracery.io/) text generator introduces new permutations of resources gained and lost. With every collision, resources are lost or gained. Sprites disappear. Who are you? What did you collide with? What happened? The third piece, created in Twine, goes a step further by inviting the player to establish their own rule set. Hypertexts produce meaning through links between ideas, events, images. This disconnected set of passages invites the player to create their own links between poetic lines. 

Yet, rules do not exist only in games. In my scholarship, I have used operational logics to analyze colonialist themes in board games and to unpack the relationships between analog and digital games. Critical making offered me the opportunity to convey these ideas in the form of a game. My partial digital adaptation of Alexander Pfister's board game *Mombasa* replaces the game's board with Google Earth's satellite imagery. My tutorial flies the player across the continent of Africa to explain game mechanics. The game's representations of colonialism are laid bare, as swathes of land are reduced to mere resources. In a paper, I have provided my own analysis of these representations. This digital demonstration provokes critical reflection on the part of the player themself.

Some people interpret rules for a living, often to disastrous effects. *Rules Lawyer* is a comic about Supreme Court interpretive methods. Textualism's supposedly strict adherence to legal text. Originalism's deference to slave owners. Using collage methods, I explored the intersections between legal rules and game rules and how they are interpreted. Do tabletop gaming assumptions about rules clarity extend outside of games? What happens when we consider laws as rules, or rules as laws? The final piece, *Justice*, combines bitsy, Tracery, and Twine to once again engage with methods of legal interpretation. Matthew R. F. Balousek's [twinecery](https://github.com/mrfb/twinecery?tab=readme-ov-file) is used to generate the constitution of a fictional country. The player is a justice of that country's highest court, and must determine if and how a given law might contradict the constitution. Each legal decision is punctuated by the striking of a gavel, created in Bitsy using Sean S. LeBlanc's [twine bitsy comms](https://github.com/seleb/bitsy-hacks/blob/main/dist/twine-bitsy-comms.js) and [multi-sprite avatar](https://github.com/seleb/bitsy-hacks/blob/main/dist/multi-sprite-avatar.js) hacks. These projects offered me a chance to develop my ideas about the Supreme Court. 

These ideas may or may not ever take on a traditional academic format - the best way to understand rules is by playing with them. But the textual supremacy of the academy may mean a lack of legitimation. Natalie Loveless's *How to Make Art at the End of the World* explores this tension. Is such work intelligible for those who "have trouble imagining how a 'chapter' can take the form of a performance or installation?" (Loveless 7). Even now, it feels to me that these projects were only ways of thinking through ideas that are destined for textual publication. But what meanings would be lost in that translation?

## Links

- [Selfie](images/selfie.jpg)
- [what's all this about?](about.html)
- Throughlines
	- [Download Instructions PDF](downloads/ThroughlinesInstructions.pdf)
	- [Right-click and select "Save link as..." to download .html file for importing into Twine](downloads/Throughlines.html)
- [Mombasa on Google Earth](https://earth.google.com/earth/d/16YTE3MbL6EG6NF-tWpTYx_iGi6XOU2mA?usp=sharing)
- [Rules Lawyer](comic.html)
- [Justice](justice.html)

